Coaching Qwen3 Coder 30B to Think Like a
CodeClash Arena Agent
Ivy Ning Zhang
Department of Computer Science
Stanford University
para2046@stanford.edu
Abstract
Large language model coding agents have recently become useful for software
tasks, but weaker or open-weight agents still struggle to reliably interpret user
intent and execute complex multi-step workflows. This gap is especially visible
in long-horizon settings, where an agent must repeatedly inspect prior outcomes,
diagnose failure, and choose the next code edit under interaction constraints. It
motivates a natural question: what can we do to improve the thinking process of a
weak code agent? We study this question in CodeClash, a code-arena benchmark
where the original work evaluates 8 commercial coding agents across 6 arenas
through multi-round tournaments. Since Qwen3 Coder Plus ranks last among
them, we take the open-weight Qwen3-Coder-30B as a case study and investigate
how to improve it with distilled knowledge from stronger agents. Our analysis
shows that Qwen3-Coder-30B is not well optimized for arena-style interaction:
it frequently produces syntax and protocol-breaking errors and exhibits weak
strategic adaptation across rounds. These failures are difficult to correct with
vanilla instruction tuning alone, since offline SFT cannot directly verify whether
a generated action is valid or beneficial. To address this, we propose ReAct
SFT, which rewrites teacher trajectories into explicit [obs][thought][act]
chains, and trajectory-quality weighted SFT, which reweights samples to encourage
post-edit checking. ReAct SFT substantially improves strategic behavior, and
our fine-tuned model outperforms the original Qwen3 Coder Plus in tournament
evaluation.
1
Introduction
In practical coding workflows, we observe a clear gap between weaker and stronger coding agents.
Weaker or free tier systems often fail to properly interpret user instructions, lose track of complex
requests, or behave unreliably over multi step interactions, whereas stronger frontier agents can
handle the same tasks much more consistently. This gap is not fully explained by standard coding
benchmarks, which mainly emphasize one shot code generation or issue resolution, such as Hu-
manEval style generation tasks [1] and repository level bug fixing benchmarks like SWE bench [2].
These observations motivate our central question: how can we improve the long horizon behavior of
a weak coding agent?
We study this question in CODECLASH [3], a benchmark platform for goal oriented, long horizon
software engineering. In CODECLASH, each model iteratively edits a private repository and then
competes with other edited codebases in a code arena, i.e., an executable environment where repository
quality is measured through downstream head to head competition rather than direct task completion.
The original benchmark evaluates 8 frontier coding agents—Claude Sonnet 4.5, GPT 5, o3, Claude
Sonnet 4, GPT 5 Mini, Gemini 2.5 Pro, Grok Code Fast, and Qwen3 Coder—across 6 code arenas
through multi round tournaments [3]. Among them, Claude Sonnet 4.5 ranks first overall, while
Qwen3 Coder ranks last. This motivates our use of the open weight Qwen3 Coder 30B as a
posttraining case study, and we use the recorded Claude Sonnet 4.5 trajectories as the teacher source
for ReAct SFT supervision. In our experiments, Qwen3 Coder 30B frequently produces syntax and
Preprint.
arXiv:2609.16096v1  [cs.SE]  14 Sep 2026


protocol breaking errors and under uses behaviors encouraged by the arena, such as log inspection,
outcome analysis, and post edit validation.
A key challenge is that vanilla instruction tuning provides only weak action level control: offline
supervised finetuning does not directly tell the model whether a generated action is protocol legal or
strategically useful for future rounds. To address this, we build on existing CODECLASH trajectories
and introduce two forms of supervision. ReAct SFT rewrites strong agent trajectories into explicit
[Obs][Thought][Act] annotations while preserving the original bash command, making the
competitive decision process more explicit. Trajectory Quality Weighted SFT (TQ-SFT) instead adds
a reliability oriented control signal by upweighting trajectories that follow safer modify then check
behavior. Empirically, ReAct SFT yields the strongest gains in competitive behavior, while TQ-SFT
mainly reduces invalid submissions without producing equally strong tournament improvements.
2
Related Work
2.1
Code arenas and interactive software engineering benchmarks
Most standard coding benchmarks evaluate models on well specified local tasks, such as code
generation from docstrings or issue resolution in a fixed repository context. For example, HumanEval
measures functional correctness for one shot code generation [1], while SWE bench evaluates
whether models can resolve real GitHub issues by producing patches that pass repository tests [2].
Interactive coding benchmarks such as InterCode further emphasize execution feedback during
problem solving [4]. In contrast, CODECLASH frames coding as goal oriented, long horizon software
engineering: agents iteratively edit private repositories and compete in multi round tournaments
across executable code arenas [3]. This makes CODECLASH a natural benchmark for our work, since
our goal is not only to improve local code generation, but to improve agent behavior under repeated
feedback and competitive pressure.
2.2
Reasoning and acting supervision for language agents
Our ReAct style supervision is motivated by prior work on language agents that interleave reasoning
and action. ReAct shows that explicitly structuring model outputs as reasoning traces followed by
task specific actions can improve sequential decision making and robustness in interactive settings [5].
More broadly, recent language agent overviews argue that effective agents require explicit reasoning,
grounding in feedback, and action selection under changing context [6]. These ideas are directly
relevant to our setting: in CODECLASH, an agent must observe logs and previous outcomes, reason
about why a round was won or lost, and then choose the next edit. Our ReAct SFT adapts this
perspective to code arenas by rewriting teacher trajectories into explicit [Obs][Thought][Act]
supervision.
2.3
Instruction tuning and its limits in long horizon coding
Instruction tuning is known to substantially improve model usability and generalization across
tasks [7]. However, open resource studies also show that instruction tuned models acquire different
capabilities depending on the supervision data, and that no single instruction tuning recipe uniformly
transfers all skills [8]. This is particularly relevant in our setting. Our preliminary experiments
suggest that vanilla instruction tuning over arena trajectories can teach Qwen3 Coder 30B to imitate
the surface format of agent responses, but not necessarily the deeper observation reasoning action
loop required for strong arena play. This motivates our comparison between two more targeted
posttraining signals: ReAct style structured supervision, which aims to transfer competitive reasoning,
and trajectory quality weighting, which aims to improve reliability under the arena protocol.
3
Task Setting
We study weak agent improvement in the CODECLASH BattleSnake arena [3]. In CODECLASH,
coding agents iteratively modify a private repository and are evaluated through multi round tour-
naments. Each round alternates between an edit phase, where the agent interacts with a terminal
scaffold under a fixed budget, and a competition phase, where the resulting codebase is executed in
2


the arena. Competition outputs, including logs and round results, are copied back into the repository
and become the main source of feedback for the next round. In the BattleSnake setting, the agent must
follow a strict single action protocol: at each step it produces exactly one bash command together
with a THOUGHT section, receives the execution result, and then continues to the next step.
Our focus is therefore not only whether Qwen3 Coder 30B can generate plausible code, but whether it
can behave like an arena agent under repeated feedback. In preliminary experiments, we observe two
recurring weaknesses: execution fragility, including syntax and protocol failures, and weak strategic
adaptation, including limited use of logs, little post edit validation, and shallow use of previous
outcomes. Our goal is to improve both reliability and competitive reasoning in this long horizon
setting.
4
Approach
Our posttraining pipeline begins with standard supervised finetuning baselines, including self play
SFT and teacher distilled SFT, and then introduces two more targeted supervision signals: ReAct SFT,
which makes the observation reasoning action structure explicit, and Trajectory Quality Weighted
SFT (TQ-SFT), which reweights training examples toward safer modify then check behavior.
4.1
Shared SFT Setup
Following prior instruction tuning practice [8], we treat each CODECLASH round trajectory as a
multi turn conversational finetuning instance. Each trajectory consists of one system message s and
a sequence of user–assistant exchanges. For the k-th assistant response ak, we define the history
context as the prefix up to the current user turn:
Xk = (s, u1, a1, . . . , uk−1, ak−1, uk),
where uk denotes the current user-side observation and ak is the corresponding assistant output, e.g.,
a THOUGHT plus one bash action block.
We serialize the full trajectory into a token sequence t1:L = (t1, . . . , tL). Let Y denote the set
of token positions that belong to assistant spans. We then optimize an assistant only supervised
finetuning objective:
LSFT = −
L
X
j=1
log pθ(tj | t<j) ·

1,
j ∈Y,
0,
otherwise.
That is, we compute loss only on assistant tokens and mask out system and user tokens. This choice
is important because it directly trains the model on the agent outputs we want to improve, rather than
on the full conversation transcript.
To enable efficient adaptation of a 30B decoder only model under long context training, we use
QLoRA/LoRA style parameter efficient finetuning [9]. In our implementation, the backbone model is
loaded in 4 bit quantized form, while forward and backward computation are performed in bfloat16
precision. LoRA adapters with rank r = 16 are inserted into the attention projection layers (q_proj,
k_proj, v_proj, and o_proj) of all Transformer blocks, while the original backbone weights
remain frozen. We also support both full trajectory training and fixed size windowing over assistant
turns, since tournament trajectories can be long while the most relevant dependencies are often local
to the recent interaction history.
4.2
ReAct SFT
Our first method addresses a limitation of vanilla instruction tuning: the model can learn to imitate
the surface form of an arena response—for example, a plausible THOUGHT followed by a bash
command—without learning how to reason strategically under feedback. To make the intended
decision process more explicit, we construct ReAct SFT supervision by rewriting teacher trajectories
into structured [Obs][Thought][Act] targets. Figure 1 illustrates the difference between vanilla
instruction style supervision and our ReAct style reformulation.
Concretely, we use Anthropic’s Claude Sonnet 4.5 API to annotate strong agent trajectories step by
step; in this setting, the model rewrites its own play trajectories. For each assistant turn, the annotation
3


Figure 1: A simplified but faithful example illustrating our supervision rewriting scheme. The raw
previous output is preserved in context, but the assistant-side reasoning target is rewritten from an
unstructured THOUGHT into explicit [Obs][Thought][Act] fields, while preserving the original
executable bash action.
prompt includes the previous execution output, the current step context, the original THOUGHT text,
and the original bash command. The annotator then rewrites only the reasoning portion into three
parts: [Obs], which summarizes the most relevant previous feedback; [Thought], which states the
strategic purpose of the current step; and [Act], which names the concrete operation being executed.
The original bash command is preserved, so the rewritten trajectory remains faithful to the teacher
action while making the observation reasoning action structure explicit.
4.3
Trajectory Quality Weighted SFT (TQ-SFT)
Our second method targets a different failure mode: invalid or poorly validated edits. In preliminary
experiments, Qwen3 Coder 30B frequently makes large modifications without checking whether
the code still runs, occasionally removes critical scaffold structure, and submits broken code. This
suggests that a useful auxiliary signal is not only what action was taken, but whether the trajectory
reflects a more reliable editing process.
To capture this, we construct rule derived trajectory annotations from the top 5 teacher trajecto-
ries. Assistant bash commands are mapped into coarse behavior categories such as MODIFY_MAIN,
CODE_CHECK, SUBMIT, STRATEGY_READ, and STRATEGY_ANALYSIS. From the temporal order of
these actions, we compute trajectory level statistics such as how often a code modification is followed
by checking before submission, and how often the agent submits without validating its changes.
These statistics are combined into a heuristic trajectory quality score qi ∈[0, 1], designed to reward
modify then check behavior and penalize blind modifications.
During training, this score is converted into a per sample weight wi, and the supervised loss is
reweighted accordingly:
LTQ-SFT =
P
i wi ℓi
P
i wi
,
where ℓi is the assistant only cross entropy loss for sample i. Intuitively, trajectories that follow a
safer edit validate submit pattern contribute more strongly to optimization, while trajectories that
modify code without checking are downweighted. Unlike ReAct SFT, TQ-SFT does not explicitly
teach the model how to reason about competition; rather, it biases the model toward more reliable
arena behavior.
4


5
Experiments
We evaluate whether posttraining can improve the long horizon arena behavior of Qwen3 Coder 30B
in CODECLASH BattleSnake. Our experiments compare three forms of posttraining: vanilla self
play SFT, ReAct SFT, and Trajectory Quality Weighted SFT (TQ-SFT). Unless otherwise noted, all
evaluations are conducted in the same BattleSnake scaffold and follow the original tournament setup
of CODECLASH [3].
5.1
Experimental Setup
All posttraining variants start from the same open weight base model, Qwen3 Coder 30B A3B
Instruct, which we refer to as Qwen3 Coder 30B. We compare the following systems:
• Vanilla self play SFT: supervised finetuning on default arena trajectories.
• ReAct SFT: supervised finetuning on trajectories rewritten into [Obs][Thought][Act]
format.
• TQ-SFT: supervised finetuning with trajectory quality weighted loss.
All finetuned variants use the same shared SFT framework described in Section 4.
5.2
Training Data
For Vanilla self play SFT, we use arena trajectories in their original format, where the assistant
produces an unstructured THOUGHT followed by a bash command. We consider three data sources
in this setting. First, we collect Qwen self play data by running Qwen3 Coder 30B against itself
for 10 tournaments, of which roughly 40% of the resulting round trajectories are valid submissions.
Second, we use recorded Gemini 2.5 Pro teacher trajectories, which contribute 1,005 round level
trajectories. Third, we use recorded Qwen3 Coder Plus teacher trajectories, which contribute
975 round level trajectories. This setting tests whether standard supervised imitation over arena
trajectories, without additional structure, is already sufficient to teach stronger arena behavior.
For ReAct SFT, we construct training data from stronger teacher trajectories by rewriting each
assistant step into structured [Obs][Thought][Act] supervision while preserving the original bash
command. Our main teacher source is the recorded Claude Sonnet 4.5 BattleSnake corpus. We
use Claude Sonnet 4.5 itself as the annotator for step level rewriting. In the initial ablations over
context length, we use an early rewritten subset of about 150 trajectories. After identifying the most
promising setting, we expand the rewritten corpus to up to 430 trajectories and use the larger set to
train the final 6 turn model.
For TQ-SFT, we build a teacher dataset from the strongest recorded agents, including Claude Sonnet
4.5, GPT 5, GPT 5 Mini, Claude Sonnet 4, and Gemini 2.5 Pro. Together, these five agents contribute
4,905 completed round level BattleSnake trajectories. We annotate each trajectory with rule derived
action labels and trajectory quality scores computed from edit/check/submit patterns, and convert
these scores into per sample loss weights during training. The purpose of this variant is to encourage
safer modify then check behavior rather than directly teaching stronger competitive strategy.
5.3
Evaluation
We use the CODECLASH framework to benchmark model performance in the BattleSnake arena.
Performance is measured at both the round and tournament levels. At the round level, we report non
tie win rate across 1,000 simulator runs with different random initializations. At the tournament level,
we compare cumulative outcomes across all 15 rounds, including total score, round wins, and tie
rounds. In addition to competitive metrics, we also track reliability oriented outcomes such as invalid
submission rounds and round collapse behavior.
5.4
Experimental Details
All experiments use QLoRA as described in Section 4. We set the learning rate to 1×10−5, use batch
size 1 with gradient accumulation of 8, and compute loss only on assistant tokens with sample level
5


Player A
Player B
Winner
Win
Lose
Tie
Primary failure side
Qwen3-30B SFT (self-play)
Qwen3-Coder-30B base
Player A
8
2
0
both
Qwen3-30B SFT (qwen-coder-plus)
Qwen3-Coder-30B base
Player B
1
4
0
mostly A
Qwen3-30B SFT (gemini-2.5-pro)
Qwen3-Coder-30B base
Player A
2
1
0
both
Table 1: Preliminary baseline comparisons at the round level, excluding abnormal rounds with
outcomes (0, 0, 1000), (0, 1000, 0), or (1000, 0, 0). Winner is determined by the higher number of
round wins among valid rounds. Primary failure side indicates whether failed rounds were mainly
caused by Player A, Player B, or both sides producing invalid submissions or structural runtime
errors.
normalization so that longer trajectories do not dominate training. Because CODECLASH trajectories
are long and GPU memory is limited, we train on sliding windows of K assistant turns together with
their corresponding user observations.
For ReAct SFT, we experiment with context windows of K ∈{2, 4, 6, 8} in order to identify the
most effective context length. For TQ-SFT, we use K = 6. We keep the optimization setup fixed
across variants so that differences are driven primarily by supervision structure and data quality rather
than by training hyperparameters.
5.5
Preliminary Baselines
Before introducing ReAct SFT and TQ-SFT, we ran a set of preliminary SFT experiments using self
play data and several teacher sources. Table 1 summarizes these comparisons and reveals a consistent
instability in ordinary arena trajectory finetuning. Although vanilla SFT can yield a modest win
rate improvement when trained on Qwen’s own self play data, it does not reliably teach the deeper
interaction loop required for competitive adaptation. Instead, the resulting models remain vulnerable
to the structural failures discussed above, including invalid submissions caused by syntax corruption
and removal of the BattleSnake starter block. This instability becomes more severe when the student
is trained directly on other agents’ trajectories: teacher data SFT using Qwen3 Coder Plus or
Gemini 2.5 Pro frequently collapses into all tie rounds or invalid execution states, suggesting
that naive imitation can amplify behavior drift rather than transfer robust strategy. See Appendix
Section A.1 for a detailed error analysis.
We observe a similar pattern in a self play variant of TQ-SFT; this result is discussed in Section 6.1.
Together, these results suggest that vanilla style SFT may help the model adapt to the surface form
of its own trajectories, but does not reliably improve strategy and can even increase failure risk at
inference time.
6
Results and Analysis
6.1
Main Tournament Results
We first explored ReAct style supervision with context windows of 2, 4, and 8 turns using an initial
rewritten subset of about 150 trajectories. Table 2 shows that the 4 turn variant performed best among
these early ablations. ReAct 2 turn appears too short to preserve enough arena history for strategic
adaptation, while ReAct 8 turn appears too long and noisy, making it harder for the student to extract
stable decision patterns.
By contrast, TQ-SFT is better understood as a reliability oriented baseline than a strong strategic
one. It improves some robustness related behaviors, but it still underperforms ReAct 4 turn in direct
competition. In a self play variant, TQ-SFT reduced invalid submissions in the generated data from
roughly 40% to 25%, yet the resulting checkpoint failed more often in actual tournament play. This
suggests that imitation based finetuning alone does not reliably improve strategic behavior and may
even increase deployment time failures through behavioral drift.
Motivated by the strong performance of ReAct 4 turn, we then expanded the rewritten corpus to up to
430 trajectories and trained a 6 turn ReAct variant as our final model. Table 3 reports the resulting
main tournament comparisons. ReAct 6 turn wins decisively against both Qwen3 Coder 30B base
6


Player A
Player B
Winner
Win
Lose
Tie
Primary failure side
ReAct 2 turn
Qwen3 Coder 30B base
Player B
1
12
0
both
ReAct 8 turn
Qwen3 Coder 30B base
Player B
1
12
1
both
ReAct 4 turn
Qwen3 Coder 30B base
Player A
6
2
1
both
TQ-SFT
Qwen3 Coder 30B base
Player B
3
6
3
mostly B
ReAct 6 turn
TQ-SFT
Player A
11
1
2
both
TQ-SFT
Vanilla SFT (self play)
Player A
3
1
0
mostly B
ReAct 4 turn
TQ-SFT
Player A
8
3
3
both
Table 2: Ablation results across post-training variants in BattleSnake, excluding abnormal rounds
with outcomes (0, 0, 1000), (0, 1000, 0), or (1000, 0, 0) from the Win/Lose/Tie counts. Winner
is determined by the higher number of round wins among valid rounds. ‘Primary failure side‘
summarizes which side mainly caused the excluded abnormal rounds.
Player A
Player B
Winner
Win
Lose
Tie
Primary failure side
ReAct 6 turn
Qwen3 Coder 30B base
Player A
9
3
1
both
ReAct 6 turn
Qwen3 Coder Plus
Player A
12
0
0
mostly B
ReAct 6 turn
Claude 4.5
Player B
0
15
0
none
Table 3: Main tournament comparisons for the strongest model, ReAct 6-turn, excluding abnormal
rounds with outcomes (0, 0, 1000), (0, 1000, 0), or (1000, 0, 0) from the Win/Lose/Tie counts. Win-
ner is determined by the higher number of round wins among valid rounds.
and Qwen3 Coder Plus, while still remaining clearly below Claude 4.5. Compared with the earlier
ReAct variants and TQ-SFT, the final model also shows fewer abnormal collapse rounds, further
supporting the value of structured observation reasoning action supervision for competitive code
editing agents.
6.2
Discussion
ReAct SFT improves competitive performance primarily by changing the interaction process rather
than only the output format. The ReAct trained model is more likely to revisit round results, inspect
logs, and choose edits tied to observed failure modes. This is consistent with the gains of the 4 turn
and 6 turn variants and suggests that structured supervision transfers part of the observation reasoning
action loop used by stronger agents.
TQ-SFT improves a different dimension. By upweighting trajectories with safer modify then check
behavior, it reduces invalid and protocol breaking actions and raises the floor of performance.
However, it does not directly teach the model which edits are strategically useful, so the model
often becomes more cautious without becoming much more adaptive. Table 4 provides a partial
behavioral breakdown consistent with this interpretation: ReAct SFT shifts behavior toward round
aware diagnosis and testing, whereas TQ-SFT mainly increases checking and analysis behaviors
associated with reliability. Detailed behavioral analysis of the tournament runs is provided in
Appendix Section A.1.
7
Conclusion and Future Work
We studied whether posttraining can improve a weaker open weight coding agent in a long horizon
competitive coding benchmark. Using Qwen3 Coder 30B in CODECLASH BattleSnake, we found
that the base model is limited by both execution fragility and weak arena specific reasoning over
logs, prior outcomes, and iterative feedback. Across the posttraining variants we evaluated, ReAct
style supervision was the most effective: the final 6 turn model, trained after expanding the rewritten
corpus beyond the initial ablation subset, substantially outperformed the base model and clearly
exceeded TQ-SFT in tournament play.
Overall, our results suggest that improving coding agents for sequential software tasks requires
more than standard instruction tuning or reliability oriented filtering. What matters is transferring a
feedback driven action policy that helps the model connect observations, reasoning, and edits over
7


Action category
Base Qwen
Qwen Coder Plus
Claude 4.5
ReAct SFT
TQ-SFT
Round / result checks (A)
1.22%
4.99%
31.75%
21.51%
9.93%
Edits-log checks (B)
0.00%
0.07%
1.67%
6.69%
0.00%
Simulation slice checks (C)
0.00%
0.40%
18.28%
0.00%
0.00%
Code structure checks (D)
6.94%
14.88%
8.08%
1.16%
0.97%
Local testing (E)
4.90%
0.35%
7.01%
11.34%
8.72%
Analysis scripts (F)
0.00%
0.29%
11.98%
9.88%
12.59%
Table 4: Partial behavioral action breakdown across representative agents in BattleSnake. Percentages
denote the share of assistant bash actions assigned to the selected categories shown here, so columns
do not sum to 100%. ReAct SFT shifts behavior toward round-aware diagnosis and testing, moving
closer to Claude 4.5, while TQ-SFT mainly increases testing and scripted analysis associated with
reliability.
repeated rounds. Structured posttraining is therefore a promising direction for open weight coding
agents, although substantial robustness gaps still remain. As future work, it would be valuable to
compare other open weight models of similar scale and to study stronger posttraining signals that
combine strategic reasoning with explicit validation.
Acknowledgements
We thank Chenglei Si for guidance throughout this work and for helping us obtain the original
tournament trajectories collected by CodeClash author John Yang, which made these experiments
possible.
References
[1] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
Kaplan, Harri Edwards, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
[2] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik
Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues?, 2023.
[3] John Yang, Kilian Lieret, Joyce Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Ofir Press, Ludwig Schmidt, and Diyi
Yang. Codeclash: Benchmarking goal-oriented software engineering, 2025.
[4] John Yang, Akshara Prabhakar, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Intercode: Standardiz-
ing and benchmarking interactive coding with execution feedback. In NeurIPS Datasets and
Benchmarks, 2023.
[5] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan
Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[6] Yu Su, Shunyu Yao, Tao Yu, and Diyi Yang. Language agents: Foundations, prospects, and risks.
In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
Tutorial Abstracts, 2024.
[7] Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, et al. Scaling
instruction-finetuned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.
[8] Yizhong Wang, Hamish Ivison, Pradeep Dasigi, Jack Hessel, Tushar Khot, Khyathi Raghavi
Chandu, David Wadden, Kelsey MacMillan, Noah A. Smith, Iz Beltagy, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi.
How far can camels go? exploring the state of instruction tuning on open resources. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.04751, 2023.
[9] Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang,
Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
8


A
Appendix
A.1
Failure Analysis of Vanilla and Self-Play SFT Baselines
As shown in Table 1, the self-play SFT model improves over the base model in several rounds, but
both models still produce multiple 0v0 all-tie rounds caused by invalid submissions or service failures.
Table 5 shows that the dominant failure modes include accidental removal of the startup block (e.g.,
run_server) and structural corruption (e.g., return outside function and broken def move
signatures). A system-level safeguard reduces startup-block removal but does not eliminate instability,
since aggressive structural edits such as large-range sed commands or full file overwrites can still
introduce invalid code. Distillation from stronger frontier models (Claude-4/4.5) and finetuning
on other agent trajectories (qwen-coder-plus, gemini-2.5-pro) show similar structural failure
patterns.
Behaviorally, Qwen-based agents perform fewer structured diagnostic actions (Table 6 and Figure 2)
and tend to apply edits without sufficient intermediate validation. Large-range modifications, such as
full overwrites or truncate-and-append patterns, frequently disrupt code structure and increase the
risk of syntax and runtime errors. This combination of limited diagnostic effort and high-risk editing
strategies reduces robustness in tournament settings, particularly for Qwen3-30B.
These results suggest that improving tournament performance requires not only stronger supervision
but also explicit behavior-level safeguards, such as pre-submit py_compile checks and startup-block
validation, together with more systematic diagnostic procedures. Instruction tuning alone can shape
response patterns, but it does not ensure runtime validity. This motivates our shift from response-level
imitation toward learning action-level validity, so that edits remain executable and structurally safe
within the deployment scaffold.
Figure 2: Correlation between error-checking and diagnosis behavior and win rate in the BattleSnake
arena.
9


Table 5: Most frequent failure modes in Qwen self-play and the corresponding agent actions that
triggered them, ordered by empirical frequency.
Observed Failure
Typical Agent Action Trigger
Startup
entrypoint
re-
moved
(run_server
block
missing)
Full-file overwrite of main.py (cat >
main.py) or truncate-to-EOF edits (sed
-i ’x,$d’ main.py)
Syntax / structural corrup-
tion
(e.g., return outside
function)
Large-range deletion plus append replace-
ment; partial function rewrite with inden-
tation drift
Invalid metadata response
(invalid character
’<’)
File rewrite that compiles but causes the
server to return malformed or non-JSON
output
Table 6: Definitions, purposes, and training value of agent-side diagnostic action categories.
Action
Representative Actions
Primary Purpose
Training / Evaluation Value
A
ls -la
/logs/rounds/
cat results.json
Confirm
win/loss
out-
comes
and
anomalous
rounds
Builds the outcome-feedback
loop and avoids blind edits
B
ls -la /logs/edits/
tail -n ...
Inspect edit trajectories
and submit status
Connects what changed with
what happened
C
cat sim_<id>.jsonl
| tail -n 5
Inspect failed or critical
simulations
Localizes crash and timeout
patterns for targeted fixes
D
grep -n "def move"
main.py
Verify critical code struc-
ture
Prevents entrypoint or signa-
ture corruption
E
pytest
python test_*.py
Validate logic before sub-
mission
Shifts failures left to local
checks
F
python
analyze_round.py
Aggregate
multi-game
patterns
Enables reusable cross-round
analysis
10
