Title: Learning Context-Free Grammars for Grammar-Constrained Decoding via Declarative Agentic Programming with Guarantees

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05493v1

Published Time: Fri, 07 Aug 2026 00:20:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Learning Context-Free Grammars for Grammar-Constrained Decoding via Declarative Agentic Programming with Guarantees 

## Kevin Cheang 1, Geoff Hulette 1, Rahul Kumar 1, Felipe R. Monteiro 1,Federico Mora 1, Robin Salkeld 1, Lin Tan 1, 2 , Serdar Tasiran 1

> 1

Amazon Web Services 

> 2

Purdue University 

Abstract 

Language models (LMs) are increasingly used to interact with external services via programs written in domain-specific languages (DSLs). Unfortunately, since DSLs are often low-resource and esoteric, LMs frequently produce syntactically invalid programs in these languages. Grammar-constrained decoding can eliminate such failures, but requires syntactic constraints. These are usually in the form of a context-free grammar for the target language, an artifact that is hard to come by for third-party DSLs. In this work, we define an agent, called Autogrammar, that automatically learns context-free grammars from documentation and execution data. Autogram-mar is formalized as a Kripke structure whose nondeterministic choices are resolved by a language model, enabling declarative control of agent behavior via linear temporal logic constraints. We evaluate four versions of Autogrammar on three DSLs (i.e., Amazon CloudWatch Logs Insights, Dynatrace Query Language, and Datadog Search Syntax) and find that it gener-ates grammars that achieve near perfect precision on unseen data; that temporal restrictions reduce execution time by 3.8×

without incurring statistically-significant loss in precision; that execution data is crucial while documentation is dispensable; and that grammar-constrained decoding using Autogrammar-generated grammars significantly improves end-to-end LM performance on eight out of ten real tasks, matching or exceed-ing the performance of a professionally-maintained grammar. In comparison, the context-free grammars generated by ex-isting LM baselines and a state-of-the-art formal technique perform significantly worse over the same evaluation. 

## 1 Introduction and Motivation 

Language models (LMs) are increasingly used to generate code in domain-specific languages (DSLs) that have far less training data than general-purpose programming languages. For example, Tang et al. (2025a) use LMs to generate Verilog designs; Pourreza and Rafiei (2023) to generate SQL queries; and Mahdavi et al. (2024) to generate PDDL plans. The cloud domain in particular is replete with DSLs. Using Claude Sonnet 4.6 to classify every string-typed parameter across 416 Amazon Web Services (AWS) API services available in the Boto3 Python SDK, we found that 23% of services expose a string parameter that must conform to a DSL. In total, we found that AWS uses at least 59 unique DSLs, 1

> 1

One author manually confirmed that all 59 unique DSLs cor-rectly correspond to at least one string-typed parameter. 

including policy languages, like IAM policies, query lan-guages, like SQL dialects, and batch scheduling languages, like cron. For example, the Query string parameter for the StartQuery API operation 2 requires a DSL program, while the LogGroupName string parameter does not. Unfortunately, many studies show that LM performance degrades sharply on low-resource DSLs. For example, in a recent survey, Joel, Wu, and Fard (2026) find that LM output quality across programming languages correlates with train-ing data availability. None of the 59 unique DSLs that we found across AWS are as high-resource as general-purpose languages, like Python. Therefore, it is reasonable to expect suboptimal out-of-the-box LM performance across API oper-ations in 23% of AWS services. We empirically confirm this for one AWS DSL in Section 4. Grammar-constrained decoding (GCD) addresses this prob-lem by restricting LM outputs to strings that conform to a syntactic specification. For example, Scholak, Schucher, and Bahdanau (2021) introduce incremental parsing alongside the decoder to reject tokens that cannot extend to a syntacti-cally valid prefix; Geng et al. (2023) show that off-the-shelf LMs with input-dependent grammars match task-specific fine-tuned models on structured NLP tasks. These approaches can be made to scale and preserve the semantic prowess of LMs. For example, Willard and Louf (2023) cast GCD in terms of finite-state machine transitions to improve decoding perfor-mance; Park et al. (2024) give an algorithm that produces outputs proportional to the LM distribution conditioned on an input grammar. We provide a comprehensive survey of GCD and related techniques in Section 5. Regardless of the theoretical variations or implementation details, all of these approaches require syntactic constraints as input, frequently in the form of a context-free grammar. But where does one obtain a grammar for GCD? For well-established languages, hand-written grammars may already exist. For the long tail of DSLs—proprietary query languages, vendor-specific syntax, evolving configuration formats—no grammar is publicly available, and writing one by hand is expensive and error-prone. For example, IV et al. (2019) empirically demonstrate the challenges of manually writing regular expressions, which correspond to a restricted form of 

> 2

See https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonCloudWatchLogs/ latest/APIReference/API_StartQuery.html. arXiv:2608.05493v1 [cs.PL] 6 Aug 2026 Learning Phase Deployment Phase In Out Act            

> Execution Logs
> ✓fields @ts | stats ...
> ✓filter status > 400
> ✗filtr @msg like
> ✓parse @msg /(?<e>.*)/
> ✗stats | | count
> Documentation
> A query is one or more com-mands separated by pipe (|). Com-mands: fields, filter, stats, sort, parse, dedup, limit, display. . .
> Autogrammar
> G(eval (x)⇒x∈C)
> . . .
> Context-Free Grammar
> start: query query: cmd (| cmd)* cmd: filter_cmd | ...
> Validator
> Check LM output with grammar
> Result
> ✓stats count() by bin(1h)
> ✗stats | | count by bin
> Downstream LM
> Generates DSL programs, like . . .
> stats count() by bin(1h) stats | | count by bin
> Task
> “Show me error rates by service”

Figure 1: Autogrammar’s two-phase pipeline. In the learning phase , Autogrammar consumes execution logs (labeled valid/invalid programs) and API documentation to produce a context-free grammar for the target DSL. In the deployment phase , a downstream LM uses the context-free grammar through a validator to generate correct DSL programs in response to natural-language tasks. context-free grammars. This motivates the central challenge of this paper: before we can use constrained decoding tools, we must first learn a high-quality grammar. Grammar inference is a classical problem in formal lan-guage theory, dating to at least as far back as Gold’s seminal work on context-free grammar identification in the limit (Gold 1967). Subsequent decades produced algorithms for learning regular languages, such as L∗ (Angluin 1987), and restricted subclasses of context-free languages that can be learned from examples (Clark and Eyraud 2007). A systems-oriented line of work eschews formal guarantees for practical techniques that learn useful context-free grammars (Bastani et al. 2017; Kulkarni, Lemieux, and Sen 2021). However, these methods assume access to a membership oracle that can be queried on arbitrary strings. This is a strict assumption when working with DSLs that can only be accessed behind authenticated, expensive, rate-limited APIs that might mutate resources. In this paper, we propose and evaluate an approach that takes inspiration from this history but uses modern tools to solve the problem in a new setting. Specifically, we de-sign a grammar-learning agent, called Autogrammar, that passively learns context-free grammars from documentation and execution data. Autogrammar is neither a fixed algo-rithmic procedure, like classic grammar learning techniques, nor a general-purpose reasoner, like modern coding agents. Instead, we formalize Autogrammar as a Kripke structure whose non-deterministic choices are resolved by an LM and whose behavior is constrained by linear temporal logic (LTL) constraints. This framing allows us to quickly declare, in the sense of the declarative programming paradigm, different versions of our agent for different settings. For example, in Section 4, we show that by only changing LTL constraints, we can reduce execution time by 3.8× while still generating context-free grammars that achieve near perfect precision on unseen data. Our approach, therefore, balances the power of LMs with the precise control of fixed algorithmic procedures. Figure 1 illustrates our approach. During the learning phase, Autogrammar ingests execution logs together with available documentation for the target DSL. We assume that these execution logs come from an existing LM agent that is actively struggling to write DSL code. If the existing agent were not struggling to write DSL code, developers would not need to turn to GCD. Autogrammar then iteratively proposes, evaluates, and refines candidate grammars until it either finds a context-free grammar that accepts the valid examples and rejects the invalid ones, or hits a resource limit. This iterative process is constrained and defined by LTL constraints. During the deployment phase, the learned grammar is handed to an implementation of GCD. We call this the “Validator,” but it can be any existing GCD tool that uses context-free grammars. At this point, the original LM agent that struggled to write DSL code, labeled “Downstream LM” in Figure 1, works with the validator to produce correct DSL programs. Overall, our approach and this paper make the following main contributions: 

• Declarative Agent Programming Framework . We frame LM agents as Kripke structures whose non-deterministic choices are resolved by LMs. This framing enables the declarative definition of agent behavior via LTL constraints. We demonstrate the framework by defining four versions of a new agent, Autogrammar, that learns context-free grammars for DSLs from execution data and documenta-tion. All versions are identical but for the LTL constraints that control the agent’s behavior. In Section 4, we show that these simple high-level edits can reduce Autogram-mar’s execution time by 3.8× while still having it generate context-free grammars that achieve near perfect precision on unseen data. 

• Significantly Better Context-Free Grammars . We use Autogrammar to generate context-free grammars for three DSLs (CloudWatch Logs Insights, Dynatrace Query Language, and Datadog Search Syntax) and show that Autogrammar-generated grammars achieve an average of 91–100% precision on unseen data over a five-fold cross-validation. These results are significantly better than those obtained by existing LM baselines and a state-of-the-art formal technique for learning context-free grammars from data. We also find that execution data is crucial while documentation is largely dispensable. • End-to-End Improvements with GCD Integration . We integrate Autogrammar-generated grammars into a simple GCD pipeline and show that this significantly improves end-to-end LM performance on 80% of tasks in a new benchmark. The benchmark consists of 10 Amazon Cloud-Watch Logs Insights tasks that were used to analyze executions of Autogrammar itself. These tasks are real and contributed to the empirical analysis in this paper. Furthermore, we show that, on these tasks, Autogrammar-generated grammars match or exceed the performance of a professionally maintained grammar for the same DSL. 

## 2 Background Needed for Approach 

In this section, we give the minimal background on Kripke structures and linear temporal logic (LTL) required to un-derstand our approach. For a comprehensive background on both concepts, see Clarke (1997). For a background on context-free grammars—the artifacts that we generate—see Lucas, Anantharaman, and Smith (2026). A Kripke structure is a 5-tuple, (S, I, R, L, AP ), where S

is a (possibly infinite) set of states, I ⊆ S is a set of initial states, R ⊆ S × S is a transition relation, L : S → 2AP is a labeling function, and AP is a set of atomic propositions over states. We often define the set of states with typed variable declarations; the set of initial states as a predicate over those typed variables; and the transition relation as a predicate over two copies of those typed variables. 

Example 1 (Coin Flipping Kripke Structure) Consider a system that generates a random bit string by repeatedly flipping a coin. We can model this as a Kripke structure whose set of states, S, is defined by two typed variables 

coin: bool and y: string ; whose set of initial states, 

I, is defined by the predicate y == "" ; and whose transition relation is defined by the predicate y’ = y + "1" if coin else y + "0" .

In the transition relation above, y’ refers to the next value of the variable and y, without the tick, refers to the current value. The transition relation predicate constrains the values that variables can take on over time. Since coin’ does not appear in the predicate for our example above, the value that 

coin takes on next is unconstrained. The labeling function L and the set of propositions AP 

can be used to constrain the behavior of the system over time using LTL. For example, we can use LTL to enforce that it is always the case that eventually our random bit string does not end in a repeated bit. Let p ∈ AP be the proposition that the state variable y does end in a repeated bit: p .

= y[-1] == y[-2] . The formula GF ¬p formally captures our constraint. In LTL, Gp means that p always (“G” is for “globally”) holds; F p means that p eventually (“F” is for “finally”) holds. These temporal operators, along with “X” (for “holds in the 

next step”), “U” (for “until”), and “W” (for “until without the requirement that it eventually holds”) can be nested and combined with boolean operators to form constraints that enforce complex system behaviors. LTL is usually used to specify what a system should do, not constrain what it does. In this paper, we use LTL to constrain what systems do. 

## 3 Approach: LTL Constrained Agents 

In this section, we describe a new approach for defining LM agents that are parameterized by LTL constraints, we define one parametric LM agent called Autogrammar, and we create four instances of Autogrammar using four different sets of LTL constraints. Autogrammar learns context-free grammars from documentation and execution data. All four versions of Autogrammar include safety constraints, like that the agent never uses the testing data during training, but differ in the constraints which, informally speaking, encode learning strategies. In Section 4 we show that encoding learning strate-gies as LTL constraints can lead to significant performance improvements while preserving rigorous guarantees. Overall, we argue that our approach provides developers with a new way to engineer safe and performant LM agents. The key idea behind our approach is to define parametric LM agents as Kripke structures where, during execution, all non-deterministic choices are made by querying an LM. The definition of the Kripke structure itself limits the choices that the LM can make. For example, the coin flipping Kripke structure in Example 1 only allows one non-deterministic choice: at each step, the coin can be heads ( True ) or tails (False ). We use LTL constraints to further restrict the non-deterministic choices. For example, G¬(y[-1] == y[-2] == y[-3]) enforces that there will never be three consecutive heads or tails, assuming y is longer than three characters. If the current state of the bit string y is "011" ,then the aforementioned LTL constraint will disallow a value of True for coin . In practice, if the underlying LM attempts to make a non-deterministic choice that would violate an LTL constraint, then our implementation would catch this and ask the LM to try again. In other words, we implement these constraints through rejection sampling. 

3.1 Autogrammar as a Kripke Structure 

We now formally define Autogrammar as a Kripke structure. 

S, I, and R Autogrammar consists of state variables that hold training data (positive and negative string examples), the documentation for the target DSL, candidate context-free grammars, and metadata, like the minimum number of cor-rect rejections required and a timestamp marking when the agent started execution. Initially, the training data comes from previously collected execution logs and the set of candidate context-free grammars is empty. At every step, the LM pow-ering Autogrammar picks between a fixed set of actions that allow it to interact with the environment. These include: 1. add_g — Propose a candidate context-free grammar. 2. eval — Test a grammar against all training examples. 3. add_s / del_s — Add/remove from the training set. 4. gen_ts — Use documentation to generate strings target-ing flaws in a grammar and add to the training set. 5. return — Return the final grammar. In short, the transition relation is a nondeterministic choice between a set of deterministic tools that operate on the state. L and AP Every time a tool is called, the call, including its arguments, is written to a state variable called head . For example, if there are two tools, f and g, both of which take a single integer argument, then f (0) , g(1) , and f (100) are all values that head could take on during an execution. The 

head variable is a ghost variable : no action modifies it di-rectly and it is only used for defining labels. Autogrammar’s labels represent predicates over the head variable and the other state variables. For example, in Autogrammar’s set-ting, evaluating a grammar is time consuming, so we will want to specify that no grammar is evaluated twice without changing the underlying data in between. To do this, we use predicates that capture the value of head . For example, we use eval(x) to mean that the given state has head = eval(x) , for some x from the set of candidate context-free grammars. Given these predicates and corresponding labeling function, we enforce the desired behavior using 

∀x. G  eval (x) = ⇒ X G¬eval (x)

W ∃y (add_s (y) ∨ del_s (y))  , (1) which reads “for all x, globally, if eval (x) holds, then from the next state onward, it is always the case that eval (x)does not hold until there is some y for which add_s (y) or 

del_s (y) hold.” 

LTL In Section 4 we compare four instances of Autogram-mar. All four versions are exactly the same except for the LTL constraints that we impose on them. In this way, Autogrammar is parametric. The version called “Unlimited” has the fewest LTL restrictions: the underlying LM is mostly allowed to make any nondeterministic choices. The few restrictions are LTL constraints like 

∀x. G (eval (x) = ⇒ x ∈ C), (2) which reads “for all x, globally, whenever eval (x) is called, 

x must be a member of C,” where C is the set of candidate context-free grammars. The version called “Performance” adds efficiency constraints, like Equation 1. It also adds a strict bound on the amount of time that the agent can take. Let t0 be the time at which the execution started, b be the maximum amount of time given to the agent, and t be the current time. For “Performance” we enforce that 

G(( t − t0 ≥ b) = ⇒ X ∃x. return (x)) . (3) The versions called “No Documentation” and “No Execution Data” extend “Performance” by disallowing actions that read documentation or execution data, respectively. 

Formal Guarantees The structure and semantics of Au-togrammar can be used to provide formal guarantees about its execution. The two most important guarantees relate to 

safety and progress . For safety, Autogrammar ensures that the underlying LM cannot train on testing data. This follows from the set of available actions—the tools that interact with execution data, read and eval , only access training data. General-purpose programming agents, like Claude Code and Copilot, do not provide similar guarantees without more heavyweight user interventions, like sand-boxing. Our Kripke structure makes these guarantees explicit and verifiable. On the other hand, Equation 1 and similar constraints encode a notion of progress. For example, test generation is expensive, so we enforce that it is never repeated on the same grammar: 

∀x. G  gen_ts (x) = ⇒ X G ¬gen_ts (x), (4) which reads “for all x, globally, if gen_ts (x) holds, then from the next state onward, gen_ts (x) never holds again.” Recent studies show that LMs can get caught in unproductive loops (Li et al. 2026; Adnan and Kuhn 2025). We use LTL to automatically prevent specific unproductive patterns that we observed in early prototypes. 

3.2 Generic Agent Programming 

Our approach mirrors how developers already build agents in practice. Frameworks like Strands allow developers to define an agent by specifying a set of tools—exactly the pattern we formalize as a Kripke structure with nondeterministic tool selection. What we add is a formal-methods framing: the Kripke structure makes the state space explicit, and LTL constraints provide declarative, verifiable restrictions on behavior. Because this formalization directly captures existing development practice, we believe it constitutes a natural programming model for constrained agents. This also suggests that the approach will generalize beyond learning context-free grammars to other agentic domains, though further empirical study is required to confirm this. 

## 4 Empirical Evaluation 

In this section, we empirically evaluate four versions of Auto-grammar and the context-free grammars they generate. To do so, we implement a prototype in Python using approximately 2300 lines of code. We use the Strands SDK to interact with LMs and we use Lark to represent context-free grammars; we prompt an LM, through Strands, to generate a Lark grammar that achieves perfect precision on a training set of examples. We prioritize precision because it is compatible with the goals of GCD: to block incorrect syntax without blocking correct syntax. We conduct all experiments on an Amazon EC2 instance with 16 virtual CPUs, 32 GiB of memory, and up to 12500 Megabit network performance (c7a.4xlarge), seeking to answer the following research questions. 1. Does Autogrammar generate context-free grammars that achieve perfect precision on unseen data? 2. How do Autogrammar-generated context-free grammars compare to those generated by state-of-the-art formal techniques and LM baselines? 3. Can Autogrammar with performance constraints generate context-free grammars of similar quality using a fraction of the time? 4. Does Autogrammar need access to both documentation and execution data? If not, which input is more important? 5. Can Autogrammar grammars improve end-to-end perfor-mance compared to LMs without grammars or LMs using existing grammars? In the end, we find that Autogrammar grammars achieve almost perfect precision on unseen test data; that Autogram-mar with LTL performance constraints generates grammars Table 1: Precision and recall per DSL per variant (mean ±std).                                                                                 

> Variant Metric CWIL DQL DSS
> Unlimited Prec. .999 ±.003 1.00 ±.000 .910 ±.124 Rec. .555 ±.197 .514 ±.060 .950 ±.112 Performance Prec. .989 ±.025 1.00 ±.000 .883 ±.162 Rec. .176 ±.112 .545 ±.064 1.00 ±.000 No Documentation Prec. .988 ±.018 .975 ±.016 .768 ±.215 Rec. .584 ±.188 .644 ±.041 1.00 ±.000 No Execution Data Prec. .113 ±.034 .892 ±.196 .770 ±.144 Rec. .306 ±.104 .477 ±.040 .950 ±.112

that are statistically no different when it comes to grammar precision while using a fraction of the time; that Autogrammar works well without documentation but that execution data is crucial for its success; and that Autogrammar grammars sig-nificantly improve end-to-end LM performance, comparable to professionally maintained existing grammars. 

4.1 RQ1-4: Grammar Analysis 

For the first four research questions, we use Claude Opus 4.6 and we focus on three DSLs: Amazon CloudWatch Logs In-sights Language (CWIL), Dynatrace Query Language (DQL), and Datadog Search Syntax (DSS). For CWIL, we have access to 41183 internal API calls, 1016 of which are negative ex-amples and 40167 of which are positive examples. For DQL, we have access to 1723 internal API calls, 354 of which are negative examples and 1369 of which are positive examples. For DSS, we have access to 838 internal API calls, 17 of which are negative examples and 821 of which are positive examples. For all three DSLs, we use the official language documentation webpages as input to Autogrammar. 

RQ1: Perfect Precision To answer the first research ques-tion, we conduct a 5-fold cross validation. For each DSL, we split the data into five sets through stratified sampling, ensuring proportional numbers of positive and negative ex-amples in each set. We then generate a context-free grammar using four of the five sets, test the context-free grammar as a successful API call classifier on the fifth set, report the test results, and then repeat the experiment with the next combi-nation. The “Unlimited” columns of Table 1 show the results. We see that Autogrammar does not generate grammars with perfect precision on the test set every time. However, for two of the three case studies—the two with more available data— Autogrammar generates grammars that achieve almost perfect precision on unseen test data. 

RQ2: Baseline Comparison To contextualize the results of RQ1, we compare Autogrammar with Arvada (Kulkarni, Lemieux, and Sen 2021) and a baseline LM approach. Ar-vada is a state-of-the-art grammar induction algorithm that learns context-free grammars using an oracle. During its execution, Arvada generates strings that may belong to the target language; Arvada uses the oracle to determine if these new strings do belong to the target language. In this way, Ar-vada is an active learning approach whereas Autogrammar is passive. Active learning approaches require oracles but often outperform passive learning approaches (Hanneke 2025). We use Arvada to learn context-free grammars for CWIL over a 5-fold cross-validation and average the results. When-ever Arvada seeks to classify a candidate string, we use an existing grammar that is maintained by the CloudWatch team for query validation in the publicly available web frontend. The second row of Table 2 contains the results of this exper-iment. With an unlimited oracle budget, Arvada makes an average of 63k oracle calls, takes an average of 14.6 hours per run, and generates context-free grammars that achieve an average precision of 0.025 on the unseen data per fold—the learned grammar rejects 97.5% of valid queries. This is in stark contrast to Autogrammar’s near perfect precision. We do not evaluate Arvada on DQL or DSS since we do not have access to a ground-truth grammar. In other circumstances, Arvada performs exceptionally well (Kulkarni, Lemieux, and Sen 2021). The key issue in our setting is that the CloudWatch service is deliberately permissive. For example, it accepts arbitrary text as filter expressions (e.g., "xyzzy foo bar" ). Arvada’s bubble-and-merge algorithm relies on negative examples from the oracle to discover structure: when a string replacement is rejected, Arvada learns that two substrings play different syntactic roles. Without sufficient negative examples, we find that Arvada cannot generalize well beyond the initial training examples, producing a grammar that is effectively a memorization of the input examples for CWIL. On the other hand, Autogrammar leverages the underlying LM’s pre-trained knowledge of programming languages to construct a context-free grammar, rather than relying on negative oracle responses to generalize. But how important is the LM’s pre-trained knowledge of programming languages? Can an LM generate a good context-free grammar without any of Autogrammar’s contributions? To answer these questions, we implement two versions of an LM baseline: LM-0 , which prompts an LM to generate a context-free grammar from the same documentation that Autogrammar reads; and LM-40 , which extends the LM-0 prompt with 20 positive and 20 negative examples. Both prompts open with the literal first sentence of Autogrammar’s agent prompt. Both versions of the LM baseline use Claude Opus 4.6, retry up to three times if the produced text fails to parse as a Lark grammar, and are evaluated in the same way as Autogrammar was for RQ1. The third and fourth rows of Table 2 show the results of our LM-baseline experiment. LM-40 is the strongest of the two and reaches at most 0.51 precision on DQL, 0.07 on CWIL, and 0.12 on DSS; an order of magnitude below Autogrammar on two of the three DSLs. Across all configurations that we evaluated, Autogrammar dominates on precision under a two-proportion z-test. All comparisons survive Holm-Bonferroni correction at α = 0 .05 to control the family-wise false-positive rate. Therefore, we conclude that the performance gap between Autogrammar and Arvada is not explained by the LM’s pre-trained knowledge alone. Autogrammar’s contributions are what turn documentation and execution data into a near-perfect grammar. Autogrammar-generated grammars significantly outperform those generated by state-of-the-art formal techniques and LM baselines. Method Oracle Calls CWIL Prec. DQL Prec. DSS Prec. Autogrammar N/A .999 ± .003 1.00 ± .000 .910 ± .124                             

> Arvada 63 K±12 K.025 ±.001 N/A N/A LM-0 N/A .046 ±.019 .228 ±.067 .023 ±.006
> LM-40 N/A .074 ±.028 .510 ±.106 .115 ±.158

Table 2: Generated grammar precision comparison. Only Arvada uses an oracle. Oracle only available for CWIL. 

RQ3: Performance In the previous experiment, Autogram-mar takes an average of 461 minutes to learn a context-free grammar for CWIL. To answer RQ3, we use the performance constraints described in Section 3. For example, we set b in Equation 3 to 120 minutes. We then measure the degrada-tion in precision and recall. Table 1 shows the results along with additional data for RQ4. Specifically, the “Performance” columns show the precision and recall of Autogrammar gram-mars per DSL under the 120 minute time limit. Table 1 shows that precision does not decrease when perfor-mance constraints are added. In fact, there is no statistically significant difference between Autogrammar with and without them for any DSL when it comes to precision. On the other hand, recall is impacted. For CWIL, there is a statistically significant drop in recall with these constraints. 

RQ4: Ablation Study Table 1 contains two additional configurations that were not used to answer RQ3. The first, “No Documentation,” refers to a configuration of Autogram-mar without any action that depends on documentation. The second, “No Execution Data,” refers to a configuration of Autogrammar without any action that depends on execution data. Both configurations include the 120 minute bounds. Sur-prisingly, Autogrammar works well without documentation for CWIL and DSS. There is no statistically significant reduction in precision or recall when documentation is removed from these two DSLs—even with the bounds. For DQL, removing documentation leads to a small ( 1.00 to 0.975 ) but statistically significant reduction in precision ( p = 0 .027 ). This suggests that for some DSLs, the LM may not effectively leverage documentation. For CWIL and DSS, the time it is spending reading documentation does not translate to an improvement in the quality of the generated grammar. On the other hand, execution data is crucial. Without execution data, Autogrammar performs significantly worse in terms of precision and recall for CWIL. Similar but less severe reductions in performance exist for DQL. DSS performance is the least impacted, likely due to the noise introduced through the lack of available data. 

4.2 RQ5: End-to-End Impact 

To answer the last research question, we instrument Auto-grammar so that it generates CloudWatch Logs during its execution, we implement three different versions of a Cloud-Watch Logs Insights query agent, and we use all three to solve 10 natural-language tasks. Each task corresponds to a real analysis of Autogrammar used in the writing of this paper or the development of Autogrammar itself. For example, “Task 10: Timestamp Arithmetic” was used to collect data on execution times for all the different versions of Autogrammar. -@ai_function(model=model_id) +@ai_function(model=model_id, + post_conditions=[grammar_check], max_attempts=5) def generate_program(task: str) -> str: """ Write a CloudWatch Logs Insights query to complete the following task. Return ONLY the query itself, with no explanations, markdown formatting, or additional text. <task> {task} </task> """ 

Figure 2: AI function for generating queries. The highlighted lines show the added post-condition. All three agents are implemented as a Strands AI function displayed in Figure 2. The first version of our AI function does not use a post-condition: we simply ask an LM to generate a query that solves a given task. The second and third versions add a post-condition, shown as the highlighted diff in Figure 2. The post-condition is a predicate called grammar_check 

that takes a candidate query and checks it using a context-free grammar. For the second version of our agent, we use a grammar generated by running Autogrammar on all available data for CWIL. For the third version of our agent, we use an existing grammar that is maintained by the CloudWatch team for query validation in the publicly available web frontend. This is the same grammar from RQ2. When executing AI functions, the Strands runtime queries the underlying language model repeatedly until the LM gener-ates an output that passes the post-condition check, or a hard iteration limit is reached (5 attempts in our experiments). In our experiments, we use six different LMs (claude-opus-4-6-v1, claude-sonnet-4-6, claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0, nova-pro-v1:0, qwen3-32b-v1:0, deepseek.v3.2), and we call each LM on each task 100 times. For each call, we run the generated CloudWatch Logs Insights query through boto3 and check if the call succeeded (no errors or exceptions). Figure 3 shows that Autogrammar can generate context-free grammars that improve end-to-end LM performance. Specifically, each bar in Figure 3 represents the percentage of boto3 CloudWatch Logs Insights query calls that succeed per task (since there are six LMs and we call each LM 100 times per task, each bar represents 600 boto3 calls). The bars labeled “No Feedback” represent the performance of the first AI function described above: the baseline performance without any formal feedback. The bars labeled “Autogram-mar” represent the performance of the AI function where 

grammar_check uses the context-free grammar generated by Autogrammar; the bars labeled “Existing” represent the performance of the AI function where grammar_check 

uses the existing CloudWatch context-free grammar. 

For 8/10 tasks, Autogrammar significantly improves per-formance over the baseline. For 1/10 tasks, Autogrammar significantly improves the performance over the professionally maintained grammar, matching its performance, otherwise. 1: Action Sequences 2: Action Timing Boxplot 3: Consecutive Gap 4: Cumulative Actions 5: Doc Heavy 6: Error Rate 7: Generate Corner Case Tests 8: Reset Contexts 9: String Read Stats 10: Timestamp Arithmetic  

> 020 40 60 80 100 Final Success Rate (%)
> 23% 40% 10% 27% 65% 10% 57% 79% 13% 25% 36% 45% 26% 45% 78% 16% 67% 89% 34% 27% 32% 46% 22% 45% 75% 16% 61% 89% 31% 32%

****** ***

> No Feedback Autogrammar Existing

* p < 0.05 Figure 3: No post-condition versus post-condition using Autogrammar-generated grammar versus post-condition using existing grammar. Error bars show 95% Wilson score confidence intervals. * = p < 0.05 (two-proportion z-test). 

4.3 Threats to Validity 

Our experiments show that Autogrammar can learn useful context-free grammars. However, these results may not gener-alize due to bias in the log data or tasks that we use. If our data does not exercise the full breadth of a target DSL, then Autogrammar might only learn a subset of the target language. We mitigate this threat by collecting as much data as possible and evaluating the end-to-end performance on a new set of tasks. If Autogrammar were not learning general context-free grammars, then we would expect to see weaker performance for the independent experiment used to answer RQ5. To make sure that the tasks we created are representative of real world usage, we instrumented Autogrammar to generate CloudWatch logs, and then we asked real questions about the logs that we used for analysis in the empirical evaluation of this paper. While the tasks will not represent all agent usage, they do represent a meaningful case study. 

## 5 Related Work 

Grammar-constrained decoding is a mature technique. The term was first coined by Geng et al. (2023), who show that off-the-shelf language models with input-dependent gram-mars match task-specific fine-tuned models on structured NLP tasks. Earlier work used related techniques to enforce syntactic and semantic validity during decoding (Scholak, Schucher, and Bahdanau 2021; Poesia et al. 2022). More recent work, like Willard and Louf (2023); Beurer-Kellner, Fischer, and Vechev (2024), focus on efficiency. Park et al. (2024) show that naive grammar-constrained decoding dis-torts the underlying distribution and give an algorithm that recovers samples proportional to the language model distri-bution conditioned on the grammar. All these papers depend on syntactic constraints. In that sense, Wang et al. (2023) is the most similar to our work. For each input, they ask LMs to predict a specialized grammar that guides DSL code gener-ation. Autogrammar takes this point of view to an extreme scale by automatically learning a formal artifact that can be independently checked and reused by existing techniques. This is related to skill and experience learning, like Wang et al. (2024) and Packer et al. (2024). Learning grammars from data has a long history (de la Higuera 2010). From a theoretical perspective, Gold (1967) es-tablished that context-free languages are not identifiable from positive data alone, motivating Autogrammar’s use of both positive and negative examples. Angluin (1987) and Clark and Eyraud (2007) identified fragments of the problem with better complexity. From a practical perspective, GLADE (Bastani et al. 2017), Arvada (Kulkarni, Lemieux, and Sen 2021), TreeVada (Arefin et al. 2024), and Mimid (Gopinath, Mathis, and Zeller 2020) are successful techniques that require oracles or parser instrumentation. Autogrammar does not depend on either. Recent work has used LMs to learn grammars (Xia et al. 2026; Tang et al. 2025b) but focused on documentation or worked on a much smaller data scale. Albinhassan et al. (2025) tackle a similar problem for context-sensitive con-straints, but their evaluation focuses on synthetic languages at a smaller scale, while Autogrammar targets real programming languages. The broadest instance of LMs producing formal artifacts is autoformalization, which translates informal input into formal statements, like context-free grammars. Wu et al. (2022); Azerbayev et al. (2023); Mora et al. (2024); Polgreen et al. (2022); Cosler et al. (2023); Mendoza et al. (2026) all fit in this category, among many others. Specification mining—learning formal artifacts from execution data—is also related (Ammons, Bodík, and Larus 2002; Ernst et al. 2007; Le and Lo 2018). Finally, a growing body of work imposes formal constraints on language model agents. For example, Winston, Winston, and Just (2026) translate natural-language tool-use policies into constraints and then use these constraints to reject un-desirable actions during execution; and Ramani et al. (2025) translate natural-language plans into Kripke structures and then check the plans using a model checker. Both of these approaches are similar in spirit to our work but differ in that we provide a programming framework to define agents as Kripke structures. This opens the door to more powerful tools, like highly expressive constraints over compositions of agents, which we intend to further explore in future work. 

## References 

Adnan, M.; and Kuhn, C. C. N. 2025. Measuring and Mit-igating Debugging Effectiveness Decay in Code Language Models. Scientific Reports , 15(1). Albinhassan, M.; Madhyastha, P.; Law, M.; and Russo, A. 2025. Learning and Enforcing Context-Sensitive Control for LLMs. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 4: Student Research Workshop) , 834–842. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ammons, G.; Bodík, R.; and Larus, J. R. 2002. Mining Speci-fications. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 2002, Portland, OR, USA, January 16-18, 2002 , 4–16. ACM. Angluin, D. 1987. Learning Regular Sets from Queries and Counterexamples. Information and Computation , 75(2): 87–106. Arefin, M. R.; Shetiya, S.; Wang, Z.; and Csallner, C. 2024. Fast Deterministic Black-box Context-free Grammar Infer-ence. In Proceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2024, Lisbon, Portugal, April 14-20, 2024 . ACM. Azerbayev, Z.; Piotrowski, B.; Schoelkopf, H.; Ayers, E. W.; Radev, D.; and Avigad, J. 2023. ProofNet: Autoformalizing and Formally Proving Undergraduate-Level Mathematics. 

CoRR , abs/2302.12433. Bastani, O.; Sharma, R.; Aiken, A.; and Liang, P. 2017. Synthesizing Program Input Grammars. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2017, Barcelona, Spain, June 18-23, 2017 , 95–110. ACM. Beurer-Kellner, L.; Fischer, M.; and Vechev, M. T. 2024. Guid-ing LLMs the Right Way: Fast, Non-Invasive Constrained Generation. In Proceedings of the 41st International Con-ference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024 , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research . PMLR. Clark, A.; and Eyraud, R. 2007. Polynomial Identification in the Limit of Substitutable Context-Free Languages. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 8: 1725–1745. Clarke, E. M. 1997. Model Checking. In Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science, 17th Conference, FSTTCS 1997, Kharagpur, India, December 18-20, 1997, Proceedings , volume 1346 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 54–56. Springer. Cosler, M.; Hahn, C.; Mendoza, D.; Schmitt, F.; and Trippel, C. 2023. nl2spec: Interactively Translating Unstructured Natural Language to Temporal Logics with Large Language Models. In Computer Aided Verification - 35th International Conference, CAV 2023, Paris, France, July 17-22, 2023, Proceedings, Part II , volume 13965 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 383–396. Springer. de la Higuera, C. 2010. Grammatical Inference: Learning Automata and Grammars . Cambridge University Press. Ernst, M. D.; Perkins, J. H.; Guo, P. J.; McCamant, S.; Pacheco, C.; Tschantz, M. S.; and Xiao, C. 2007. The Daikon System for Dynamic Detection of Likely Invariants. Science of Computer Programming , 69(1–3): 35–45. Geng, S.; Josifoski, M.; Peyrard, M.; and West, R. 2023. Grammar-Constrained Decoding for Structured NLP Tasks without Finetuning. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2023, Singapore, December 6-10, 2023 , 10932–10952. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Gold, E. M. 1967. Language Identification in the Limit. 

Information and Control , 10(5): 447–474. Gopinath, R.; Mathis, B.; and Zeller, A. 2020. Mining Input Grammars from Dynamic Control Flow. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2020, Virtual Event, USA, November 8-13, 2020 ,172–183. ACM. Hanneke, S. 2025. Agnostic Active Learning Is Always Better Than Passive Learning. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2025, NeurIPS 2025 .IV, L. G. M.; Donohue, J.; Davis, J. C.; Lee, D.; and Servant, F. 2019. Regexes are Hard: Decision-Making, Difficulties, and Risks in Programming Regular Expressions. In 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE 2019, San Diego, CA, USA, November 11-15, 2019 , 415–426. IEEE. Joel, S.; Wu, J.; and Fard, F. 2026. A Survey on LLM-based Code Generation for Low-Resource and Domain-Specific Programming Languages. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology .Kulkarni, N.; Lemieux, C.; and Sen, K. 2021. Learning Highly Recursive Input Grammars. In 36th IEEE/ACM In-ternational Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE 2021, Melbourne, Australia, November 15-19, 2021 ,456–467. IEEE. Le, T. B.; and Lo, D. 2018. Deep Specification Mining. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, ISSTA 2018, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, July 16-21, 2018 , 120–130. ACM. Li, X.; Yan, W.; Wu, Y.; Liang, P.; Yuan, M.; Liu, J.; and Yang, J. 2026. Early Diagnosis of Wasted Computation in Multi-Agent LLM Systems via Failure-Aware Observability. 

CoRR , abs/2606.01365. Lucas, Z. S.; Anantharaman, P.; and Smith, S. W. 2026. Seventy Years of Parsing: Theoretical and Practical Conse-quences. In 2026 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy Workshops (SPW) , 1–25. IEEE. Mahdavi, S.; Aoki, R.; Tang, K.; and Cao, Y. 2024. Leveraging Environment Interaction for Automated PDDL Translation and Planning with Large Language Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37: Annual Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024 .Mendoza, D.; Mavridou, A.; Katis, A.; and Trippel, C. 2026. Automating Requirements Formalization: Using LLMs and Low-Complexity Distinguishing Traces for Semantic Valida-tion. In Proceedings of the 48th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2026 .Mora, F.; Wong, J.; Lepe, H.; Bhatia, S.; Elmaaroufi, K.; Varghese, G.; González, J. E.; Polgreen, E.; and Seshia, S. A. 2024. Synthetic Programming Elicitation for Text-to-Code in Very Low-Resource Programming and Formal Languages. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024 .Packer, C.; Fang, V.; Patil, S. G.; Lin, K.; Wooders, S.; and Gonzalez, J. E. 2024. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as Operating Systems. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024 . OpenReview.net. Park, K.; Wang, J.; Berg-Kirkpatrick, T.; Polikarpova, N.; and D’Antoni, L. 2024. Grammar-Aligned Decoding. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024 , 24547–24568. Poesia, G.; Polozov, O.; Le, V.; Tiwari, A.; Soares, G.; Meek, C.; and Gulwani, S. 2022. Synchromesh: Reliable Code Generation from Pre-trained Language Models. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022 . OpenReview.net. Polgreen, E.; Cheang, K.; Gaddamadugu, P.; Godbole, A.; Laeufer, K.; Lin, S.; Manerkar, Y. A.; Mora, F.; and Seshia, S. A. 2022. UCLID5: Multi-Modal Formal Modeling, Verifi-cation, and Synthesis. In Computer Aided Verification - 34th International Conference, CAV 2022, Haifa, Israel, August 7-10, 2022, Proceedings, Part I , volume 13371 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 538–551. Springer. Pourreza, M.; and Rafiei, D. 2023. DIN-SQL: Decomposed In-Context Learning of Text-to-SQL with Self-Correction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023 , 36339–36348. Ramani, K.; Tawosi, V.; Alamir, S.; and Borrajo, D. 2025. Bridging LLM Planning Agents and Formal Methods: A Case Study in Plan Verification. In AgenticSE Workshop at the 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, ASE 2025 .Scholak, T.; Schucher, N.; and Bahdanau, D. 2021. PICARD: Parsing Incrementally for Constrained Auto-Regressive De-coding from Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing, EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event / Punta Cana, Domini-can Republic, 7-11 November, 2021 , 9895–9901. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tang, J.; Qin, J.; Thorat, K.; Chen, Z.-T.; Cao, Y.; Zhao, Y. K.; and Ding, C. 2025a. HiVeGen – Hierarchical LLM-based Verilog Generation for Scalable Chip Design. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on LLM-Aided Design, ICLAD 2025 , 30–36. Tang, W.; Li, Y.; Sypherd, C.; Polgreen, E.; and Belle, V. 2025b. HyGenar: An LLM-Driven Hybrid Genetic Algo-rithm for Few-Shot Grammar Generation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 ,13640–13665. Association for Computational Linguistics. Wang, B.; Wang, Z.; Wang, X.; Cao, Y.; Saurous, R. A.; and Kim, Y. 2023. Grammar Prompting for Domain-Specific Language Generation with Large Language Models. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023 .Wang, G.; Xie, Y.; Jiang, Y.; Mandlekar, A.; Xiao, C.; Zhu, Y.; Fan, L.; and Anandkumar, A. 2024. Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language Models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Willard, B. T.; and Louf, R. 2023. Efficient Guided Generation for Large Language Models. CoRR , abs/2307.09702. Winston, C.; Winston, C.; and Just, R. 2026. Solver-Aided Verification of Policy Compliance in Tool-Augmented LLM Agents. CoRR , abs/2603.20449. Wu, Y.; Jiang, A. Q.; Li, W.; Rabe, M. N.; Staats, C.; Jam-nik, M.; and Szegedy, C. 2022. Autoformalization with Large Language Models. In Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022 .Xia, S.; He, M.; Jia, H.; and Song, L. 2026. Doc2Spec: Syn-thesizing Formal Programming Specifications from Natural Language via Grammar Induction. CoRR , abs/2602.04892.